For immediate release - January 2nd, 2002

Archives in Cyberspace

San Francisco, C.A. -- On January 4th 2002, a new worldwide web
archive system, called OLAC, will be launched in the Grand Ballroom of
the Embarcadero Hyatt Regency.  The system, to be unveiled at the
annual conference of the Linguistic Society of America, will permit
students, educators and scholars to locate information about the
world's 7,000 languages.  Also included are new linguistic
technologies, such as automatic speech recognition, machine
translation, and information retrieval on the web.

..................................................................

Further information for science writers:

The Open Language Archives Community (OLAC) is an international
partnership of institutions and individuals who are creating a
worldwide virtual library of language resources.  Language resources
include dictionaries and thesauri, text collections, transcribed audio
and video recordings, linguistic field notes, as well as computer
software for creating, searching and publishing these materials.
Language resources are created and used in the development of language
technologies, such as automatic speech recognition, machine
translation, and information retrieval on the web.  Language resources
are also created and used in language teaching, in the linguistic
sciences, and in documenting thousands of endangered languages.

In the past, scholars have used proprietary software (such as
Microsoft Word) for creating dictionaries and other resources.  Today,
much of the information on endangered languages is stored in binary
files which are outdated and unreadable in less than a decade.  Steven
Bird, Associate Professor of Linguistics and Computer Science at the
University of Pennsylvania, has described this process as "encrypting
the world's linguistic heritage".  OLAC is responding to this
difficult problem with a new process for identifying international
best practices for long-term digital language preservation.

Recently, OLAC has undergone rapid growth, and today boasts a network
of archives containing over 18,000 resources in five countries.  The
diversity of the archives is striking.  Institutions such as the
American Philosophical Society in Philadelphia and the Alaska Native
Language Center have over a century of historical documents and sound
recordings for American Indian languages.  The Comparative Bantu
Online Dictionary at Berkeley has dictionaries for hundreds of
languages from sub-Saharan Africa.  The Ethnologue Database of the
Summer Institute of Linguistics contains basic information for over
7,000 living and recently extinct languages.  The Linguistic Data
Consortium at the University of Pennsylvania has resources for the
development of speech recognition, machine translation, and
information retrieval systems.  All of these resources can be searched
using the OLAC gateway, hosted at http://linguistlist.org/olac/.

The OLAC Launch will take place at the San Francisco Hyatt Regency,
5 Embarcadero Center, in Grand Ballroom B, 2:00-4:30pm, Friday 4 January.

OLAC is supported by the National Science Foundation, and is a member
of the Open Archives Initiative (supported by the Digital Library
Federation and the Coalition for Networked Information).

For further information, please see www.language-archives.org

Contact:

Steven Bird Ph.D.
University of Pennsylvania
sb@ldc.upenn.edu
215 573-3352 (Philadelphia)
415 788-1234 (Hyatt Regency Embarcadero, 3-7 January)

----end----
