Invitation to participate in the Open Language Archives Community

San Francisco -- On January 4th 2002, a new worldwide web archive system
called OLAC was launched at the annual conference of the Linguistic Society
of America.  The system permits students, educators and scholars to locate
information about the world's 7,000 languages and a variety of linguistic
resources including text collections, recordings, and linguistic analyses.
Also included are pointers to new linguistic technologies, such as
automatic speech recognition, machine translation, and information
retrieval on the web.

The Open Language Archives Community (OLAC) is an international
partnership of institutions and individuals who are creating a
worldwide virtual library of language resources.  Language resources
include dictionaries and thesauri, text collections, transcribed audio
and video recordings, linguistic field notes, as well as computer
software for creating, searching and publishing these materials.
Language resources are created and used in the development of language
technologies, such as automatic speech recognition, machine
translation, and information retrieval on the web.  Language resources
are also created and used in language teaching, in the linguistic
sciences, and in documenting thousands of endangered languages.

In the past, scholars have used proprietary software (such as
Microsoft Word) for creating dictionaries and other resources.  Today,
much of the information on endangered languages is stored in binary
files which are outdated and unreadable in less than a decade, and a
major result of the scholarship is "encrypted linguistic heritage."
OLAC is responding to this difficult problem with a new process for
identifying international best practices for long-term digital
language preservation.

Recently, OLAC has undergone rapid growth, and today boasts a network
of archives containing over 18,000 resources in five countries.  The
diversity of the archives is striking.  Institutions such as the
American Philosophical Society in Philadelphia and the Alaska Native
Language Center have over a century of historical documents and sound
recordings for American Indian languages.  The Comparative Bantu
Online Dictionary at Berkeley has dictionaries for hundreds of
languages from sub-Saharan Africa.  The Ethnologue Database of the
Summer Institute of Linguistics contains basic information for over
7,000 living and recently extinct languages.  The Linguistic Data
Consortium at the University of Pennsylvania has resources for the
development of speech recognition, machine translation, and
information retrieval systems.  All of these resources can be searched
using the OLAC gateway, hosted at http://saussure.linguistlist.org/olac/.

OLAC now seeks to expand its coverage to include language resource
archives of all kinds and sizes.  OLAC provides three convenient
methods for individuals and archives to document their resources so
that they appear in the cross-archive search system.  Existing
archives with large catalogues can export the necessary information in
a simple XML format, while keeping all their data in the original
database.  At the other end of the spectrum, individuals can
disseminate the resources they create by simply filling in web forms
on the OLAC site.  Resources are classified by such properties as
subject language, linguistic type, and data format.  Software
resources are also included, and classified according to the same
properties, as well as operating system.

OLAC is supported by the National Science Foundation, and is a member
of the Open Archives Initiative (supported by the Digital Library
Federation and the Coalition for Networked Information).

For further information please see www.language-archives.org, join the
low-volume OLAC-General mailing list to receive occasional
announcements, or contact Steven Bird and Gary Simons, the OLAC
coordinators.

Steven Bird <sb@ldc.upenn.edu>
Gary Simons <Gary_Simons@sil.org>


